Student blog: GSoC results (#108)
haskell-org/summer-of-haskell: content/news/2019-08-26-gsoc-results.md

---
title: 'Student Blog: GSoC Results'
author: 'Vasily Alferov'
---

I am a student at Summer of Haskell this year, and that's my final post. This
post is written to sum up the work I've done. Although this post is a formal

> requirement of GSoC, I hope that this post is attractive to everyone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requirement of GSoC, I wanted to publish it here to reach a wider audience.
```

# My proposal

When you apply to Summer of Code, you write a proposal. The proposal is a
document in which you describe your ideas on the chosen project. It should be a
clear, detailed text with suggestions on every subtask. The proposal should also

> include a timeline, in which you estimate the time you spend on every subtask.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
include a timeline, in which you estimate the time you intend to spend on each of those subtasks.
```

I chose [this](https://summer.haskell.org/ideas.html#algebraic-graphs) project
for my summer. In my proposal, I drafted all the algorithms mentioned in the
list and suggested a few more. I published this part of my proposal as a Github
gist [there](https://gist.github.com/vasalf/c246171d8ebd784487624853566b8df2).

> I don't suggest this gist as an example of a good proposal. It's only a part of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I don't suggest this gist as a complete example of a good proposal: it's only a part of
```

the document I submitted. You should also include some information about you,
together with the timeline. Communication with your future mentors is also a
significant part of the application.

However, as I mentioned in
[one of my previous posts](https://summer.haskell.org/news/2019-05-29-alga-introduction.html),

> another student is doing the part suggested in the ideas list. My task is to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
another student ended up doing the part suggested in the ideas list. So my task is to
```

introduce bipartite graphs.

This task was my idea. I mentioned it in my proposal. I meant that finding
maximum matchings in bipartite graphs should be easily implemented when we have
algorithms for finding maximum flows in networks. Kuhn's algorithm is an
application of the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm, and the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm is
an application of Dinic's algorithm.

However, this option is not the best. Both algorithms have specialized
implementations that work times faster. So my task for this summer was to

> introduce bipartite graphs and special functions for them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
introduce bipartite graphs and special functions for working with them.
```

# What I've done

I made four pull requests to Alga this summer. Each pull request represents a
separate task and summarizes the work of several weeks.

Each PR contains the actual implementation, tests, and documentation. The whole
project is release-ready after merging each one of them. I put the tests in the
`test/` directory. The documentation for each function and datatype precedes the
declaration. After release, it will compile to beautiful Haddock file like
[this](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/algebraic-graphs-0.4/docs/Algebra-Graph.html).

# Part I. Definition and properties.

> **Link to PR:** [https://github.com/snowleopard/alga/pull/207](https://github.com/snowleopard/alga/pull/207)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Link to PR:** <https://github.com/snowleopard/alga/pull/207>
```

In this part, I defined the `Bipartite.AdjacencyMap` datatype and added many

> functions for its properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
functions to work with adjacency maps.
```

> The datatype represents a map of vertices into their neighbours. I defined it a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The datatype represents a map of vertices into their neighbours. I defined it as
```

two maps:

```Haskell
data AdjacencyMap a b = BAM {
    leftAdjacencyMap :: Map.Map a (Set.Set b),
    rightAdjacencyMap :: Map.Map b (Set.Set a)
}
```

> The properties are based on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The properties are based on the existing
```

[properties](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/algebraic-graphs-0.4/docs/Algebra-Graph.html)
of graphs in Alga.

# Part II: Testing bipartiteness

> **Link to PR:** [https://github.com/snowleopard/alga/pull/218](https://github.com/snowleopard/alga/pull/218)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Link to PR:** <https://github.com/snowleopard/alga/pull/218>
```

> There is a folklore algorithm that tests a given graph on being bipartite. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a folklore algorithm that checks if a given graph is bipartite. The
```
active tense reads a little easier than passive

> task to implement this algorithm in Haskell was a little challenge for me.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
task to implement this algorithm in Haskell was a little challenging for me.
```

I finished up with the following definition of the function:

```Haskell
detectParts :: Ord a => AM.AdjacencyMap a -> Either (OddCycle a) (AdjacencyMap a a)
```

> This naturally means that the graph is either bipartite or contains an odd

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can clearly see in the type, this means that the graph is either bipartite or contains an odd
```

Author: I changed this paragraph to
```
It is known that a graph is bipartite if and only if it contains no cycles of
odd length. This function either finds an odd cycle or returns a partition.
```

cycle.

The implementation is so exciting that I wrote a whole
[post](https://summer.haskell.org/news/2019-07-26-testing-bipartiteness.html)
about it. I explained the reason I needed monad transformers there and made some
interesting benchmarks that pointed me to use the explicit `INLINE` directive.

# [WIP] Part III. Graph families.

> **Link to the unfinished PR**: [https://github.com/snowleopard/alga/pull/226](https://github.com/snowleopard/alga/pull/226)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Link to the unfinished PR**: <https://github.com/snowleopard/alga/pull/226>
```

Some families of graphs are bipartite: simple paths, even cycles, trees,
bicliques, etc. The task is to provide a simple method to construct all those
graphs.

The most exciting part of this task was to provide type-safe implementations.
For example, only cycles of even length are bipartite. And speaking of paths, we
should provide a method for constructing paths of vertices of two different
types.

The `circuit` definition for constructing graphs containing one even cycle is
simple:

```Haskell
circuit :: (Ord a, Ord b) => [(a, b)] -> AdjacencyMap a b
```

For the paths, I added a special type for alternating lists:

```Haskell
data List a b = Nil | Cons a (List b a)
```

So the `path` definition is:

```Haskell
path :: (Ord a, Ord b) => List a b -> AdjacencyMap a b
```

> As for now, the PR is almost merge-ready, only several small notices need fixes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As for now, the PR is almost merge-ready, only several small comments need fixes.
```

# [WIP] Part IV. Hopcroft-Karp algorithm for maximum matchings

> **Link to the unfinished PR**: [https://github.com/snowleopard/alga/pull/229](https://github.com/snowleopard/alga/pull/229)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Link to the unfinished PR**: <https://github.com/snowleopard/alga/pull/229>
```
